Describe process for contributing a new standard: (#96)
XRPLF/XRPL-Standards: CONTRIBUTING.md

Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS" (XRPL Standard), "RFC" (Request for Comments), or "document".

## Summary

Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

All contributors grant everyone:

Copyright – a royalty-free license to use the copyrights for their contributions.
Patent – a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.

## Background

The work of the XRP Ledger community is open source, collaborative, and welcoming of all contributors participating in good faith. [Learn more about the XRP Ledger at XRPL.org](https://xrpl.org/).

This XRPL-Standards process is influenced by the well-established [IETF RFC process](https://www.ietf.org/standards/process/informal/).

## Process

The XRPL-Standards process attempts to be easy to use, but also rigorous enough that there are permalinks to revisions of documents for reference purposes.

### Gathering Feedback Before Submitting

Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback helps to refine your concept. This step is required.

> Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.

Author: ```suggestion
Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.

The title should follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d {Title}`, where `0000` is a unique number for the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft (in progress), and `{Title}` is a descriptive title for the proposed document.
```

Reviewer: ```markdown
Start a [discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.
```

Discussions are suitable for early work-in-progress: ask, suggest, add, and make sweeping changes.

> Once settled, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** adding the standard to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

Reviewer 2: I suspect we might want to refine some of this guideline over time as "settled" may be hard to gauge sometimes

> Once settled, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** adding the standard to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

Author: ```suggestion
Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).
```

> Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

Author: ```suggestion
Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits.

The content of the discussion should be edited into a summary, with a link to the PR.

The last comment on the discussion should also be a link to the PR.

Finally, the discussion should be closed from further comments, with further comments instead being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation or adoption (as appropriate).
```

> Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

Author: Added.

> Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

Reviewer 3: I wonder about making L34 more specific to describe when a discussion moves to a PR. Maybe we also want authors to provide warning before closing a discussion for comment.

"When a discussion has produced a well refined standard, the standard author should work with the repository maintainers to move from discussion to **PULL REQUEST**. Authors should post a comment to a discussion warning that it will be closed multiple days before closing the discussion for further comment, thus allowing those engaged with the discussion time to submit final commentary.

When moving to a pull request, add the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo..."

When opening a PR, there are two document types: *Drafts* and *Candidate Specifications*. The type and status of any particular document has no bearing on the priority of that document. Typically, the further along in the process, the more likely it is that any particular XLS will be implemented or adopted.

### Drafts

> A _Draft_ is a document that proposes some new feature, protocol or idea related to the XRP Ledger. The criteria for getting the document merged is minimal: project maintainers will review the document to ensure style conformance and applicability, but will otherwise not require editorial fixes before allowing it to be published.

Author: It is merged, with the `d` kept in its name, to indicate that it is not yet finalized.

A Draft is often stable enough for people to experiment with, but has not necessarily been endorsed by the entire community. When there are competing Drafts that address the same problem in different ways, all such Drafts can continue to be refined, promoted, and used independently, without any blocking. Implementors can create software to implement this type of standard into their codebase to explore how it works in a real world setting.

Any, or all, competing Drafts may graduate into a Candidate Specification.

Notice that a Draft is not a [rubber-stamp](https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/rubber-stamp) of the content in any particular document. Documents can still undergo significant changes and potentially be discarded all together.

#### Publishing a Draft

> To publish a new Draft, submit a Pull Request to this repo with a new folder and a new Markdown file. The folder MUST follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d-{title}`, `0000` is the unique number referencing the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft, and `title` is a lower case title with spaces replaced by hyphens (`-`). The submission should have front-matter (similar to GitHub pages rendered from Markdown) specifying at least a `title`, `type`, and `revision` (an integer, starting at 1 and incrementing with each revision of the RFC). The `type` MUST have the value `draft`.

Author: Adding at line 32 in next commit.

# CONTRIBUTING

Contributions to the XRPL-Standards repo are free, open source, and follow the following document publishing process.

Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS" (XRPL Standard), "RFC" (Request for Comments), or "document".

## Summary

Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

All contributors grant everyone:

Copyright – a royalty-free license to use the copyrights for their contributions.
Patent – a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.

## Background

The work of the XRP Ledger community is open source, collaborative, and welcoming of all contributors participating in good faith. [Learn more about the XRP Ledger at XRPL.org](https://xrpl.org/).

This XRPL-Standards process is influenced by the well-established [IETF RFC process](https://www.ietf.org/standards/process/informal/).

## Process

The XRPL-Standards process attempts to be easy to use, but also rigorous enough that there are permalinks to revisions of documents for reference purposes.

### Gathering Feedback Before Submitting

> Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback may be helpful to refine your concept.

Reviewer 4: One point of clarification possibly between what this spec is suggesting and maybe what you're preferring @Silkjaer -- the original intent of this PR was actually to suggest that there should be a minimal bar to getting a PR into a draft mode (but the current two categories in this PR maybe don't allow for that).

The motivation for "low barrier" is for spec editing. It's really difficult to spec-edit in a GH discussion, so while having discussions in there is fine, it's important to create low barriers to initial PR so that a spec can be efficiently improved/edited. You can see that in action here in _this_ PR between you and me -- imagine having this back and forth in GH discussions!

I suppose what I'm getting at is it should be fine for us to have many, poor quality "draft" specs -- that means we have lots of things being proposed, and we just need a mechanism to distinguish between "random ideas" and "specs with legs" and "things that are final"

To that end, perhaps we should introduce a third category in this PR, maybe like this:

1. **Proposal**: A Proposal is an RFC document that proposes some new feature, protocol or idea (i.e., any random idea, low-barrier to PR).
2. **Working Draft**: A Working Draft is an RFC that has become stable enough for people to experiment with, but has not necessarily been endorsed by the entire community.
3. **Candidate Specification**: A Candidate Specification is a document that was previously a Working Draft RFC that is considered stable enough by the community such that no further changes are required.

> Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback may be helpful to refine your concept.

Author: ```suggestion
Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback helps to refine your concept. This step is required.
```

> Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback may be helpful to refine your concept.

Author: I would be fine with introducing a third category in this PR if that's what @Silkjaer wants. But until @Silkjaer confirms, I don't think it's necessary.

Per @Silkjaer 's request, I added a line here to make it clear that gathering community feedback is required.

> Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.
> 
> You can also have a conversation with other community members in the [XRP Ledger Developers Discord server](https://xrpldevs.org/).

Author: ```suggestion
Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.
```

> You can also have a conversation with other community members in the [XRP Ledger Developers Discord server](https://xrpldevs.org/).

Author: Agree with @sappenin but I don't have a problem with excluding this link (it could always be added in the future, if we change our minds). Removed.

Discussions are suitable for early work-in-progress: ask, suggest, add, and make sweeping changes.

Once settled, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** adding the standard to the repo with one or more commits. At this time, the discussion should be archived and closed from further comments, with any further comments being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation (as appropriate).

> When opening a PR, there are two document types: *Drafts* and *Candidate Specifications*. The type and status of any particular document has no bearing on the priority of that document, although typically the further along in the process, the more likely it is that any particular XLS will be implemented.

Author: ```suggestion
When opening a PR, there are two document types: *Drafts* and *Candidate Specifications*. The type and status of any particular document has no bearing on the priority of that document. Typically, the further along in the process, the more likely it is that any particular XLS will be implemented or adopted.
```

# CONTRIBUTING

> Contributions to the XRPL-Standards repo are free, open source, and follow the following document publishing process.

Reviewer: "Contributions to this repo are..."

> Contributions to the XRPL-Standards repo are free, open source, and follow the following document publishing process.

Author: ```suggestion
Contributions to this repo are free, open-source, and follow the process outlined below:
```

> Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS" (XRPL Standard) or "document".

Reviewer: `...as an "XLS", "XRPL Standard", or "document".`

> Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS" (XRPL Standard) or "document".

Author: ```suggestion
Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS", "XRPL Standard", or "document".
```

## Summary

> Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Reviewer: ```markdown
...is subject to the terms of the [license](LICENSE).
```

> Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Author: ```suggestion
Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [license](LICENSE).
```

All contributors grant everyone:

> Copyright – a royalty-free license to use the copyrights for their contributions.

Reviewer: ```markdown
Copyright: a royalty-free...
```

> Patent – a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.

Reviewer: ```markdown
Patent: a commitment to...
```

> Patent – a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.

Author: ```suggestion
Patent: a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.
```

## Background

The work of the XRP Ledger community is open source, collaborative, and welcoming of all contributors participating in good faith. [Learn more about the XRP Ledger at XRPL.org](https://xrpl.org/).

## Process

The XRPL-Standards process attempts to be easy to use, but also rigorous enough that there are permalinks to revisions of documents for reference purposes.

### Gathering Feedback Before Submitting

Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback helps to refine your concept. This step is required.

Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.

> The title should follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d {Title}`, where `0000` is a unique number for the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft (in progress), and `{Title}` is a descriptive title for the proposed document.

Reviewer: How do I know what new unique number to take?

Reviewer: Perhaps no number until PR?

Reviewer 5: Since all XLS starts in discussions, it should be pretty easy to spot the largest number. In case a double happens, it can be fixed by a maintainer? I think the number is important, as they are commonly used to reference features and ideas throughout the community.

> The title should follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d {Title}`, where `0000` is a unique number for the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft (in progress), and `{Title}` is a descriptive title for the proposed document.

Author: ```suggestion
The title should follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d {Title}`, where `0000` is a unique number for the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft (in progress), and `{Title}` is a descriptive title for the proposed document.

Use the next number that has not yet been used. If a conflict occurs, it will be fixed by a maintainer or editor. Maintainers or editors also reserve the right to remove or re-number proposals as necessary.

The number is important, as it will be used to reference features and ideas throughout the community.
```

# CONTRIBUTING

Contributions to the XRPL-Standards repo are free, open source, and follow the following document publishing process.

Any XRPL-Standards document can be referred to interchangeably as an "XLS" (XRPL Standard), "RFC" (Request for Comments), or "document".

## Summary

Copyright on all content is subject to the terms of the [MIT License](LICENSE).

All contributors grant everyone:

Copyright – a royalty-free license to use the copyrights for their contributions.
Patent – a commitment to license on a royalty-free basis their essential patent claims reading on their contributions.

## Background

> The work of the XRP Ledger community is being done under the framework of a W3C Community Group and is therefore guided by the [processes](https://www.w3.org/community/about/agreements/) laid out by the W3C for these groups.

Reviewer 4: I think we should delete this section -- there's no W3C association that I'm aware of.

> Also influencing this process is the well-established and popular IETF RFC process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also influencing this process is the well-established and popular [IETF RFC process](https://www.ietf.org/standards/process/informal/).
```

> The work of the XRP Ledger community is being done under the framework of a W3C Community Group and is therefore guided by the [processes](https://www.w3.org/community/about/agreements/) laid out by the W3C for these groups.
> 
> Also influencing this process is the well-established and popular [IETF RFC process](https://www.ietf.org/standards/process/informal/).

Author: ```suggestion
The work of the XRP Ledger community is open source, collaborative, and welcoming of all contributors participating in good faith. [Learn more about the XRP Ledger at XRPL.org](https://xrpl.org/).

This XRPL-Standards process is influenced by the well-established [IETF RFC process](https://www.ietf.org/standards/process/informal/).
```

## Process

The XRPL-Standards process attempts to be easy to use, but also rigorous enough that there are permalinks to revisions of documents for reference purposes.

### Gathering Feedback Before Submitting

There are good ways to get community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback may be helpful to refine your concept in its early stages. You may start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo to start a high-level discussion, or have a conversation with other community members in the [XRP Ledger Developers Discord server](https://xrpldevs.org/).

Discussions are suitable for early work-in-progress: ask, suggest, add, and make sweeping changes. Once settled, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** adding the standard to the repo with one or more commits.

> When opening a PR, there are two document types: *Drafts* and *Candidate Specifications*. The type and status of any particular document has no bearing on the priority of that document, although typically the further along in the process, the more likely it is that any particular XLS will be implemented.

Author: I agree with @sappenin but I also think it's fine to broaden this. Changed to "implemented or adopted".

### Drafts

A _Draft_ is a document that proposes some new feature, protocol or idea related to the XRP Ledger. The criteria for getting the document merged is minimal: project maintainers will review the document to ensure style conformance and applicability, but will otherwise not require editorial fixes before allowing it to be published.

A Draft is often stable enough for people to experiment with, but has not necessarily been endorsed by the entire community. When there are competing Drafts that address the same problem in different ways, all such Drafts can continue to be refined, promoted, and used independently, without any blocking. Implementors can create software to implement this type of standard into their codebase to explore how it works in a real world setting.

Any, or all, competing Drafts may graduate into a Candidate Specification.

Notice that a Draft is not a [rubber-stamp](https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/rubber-stamp) of the content in any particular document. Documents can still undergo significant changes and potentially be discarded all together.

#### Publishing a Draft

> To publish a new Draft, submit a Pull Request to this repo with a new folder and a new Markdown file. The folder MUST follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d-{title}`, `0000` is the unique number referencing the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft, and `title` is a lower case title with spaces replaced by hyphens (`-`). The submission should have front-matter (similar to GitHub pages rendered from Markdown) specifying at least a `title`, `type`, and `revision` (an integer, starting at 1 and incrementing with each revision of the XLS). The `type` MUST have the value `draft`.
> 
> Use the following template when creating the Markdown file: [xls-template.md](./xls-template.md)
> 
> Assuming there is consensus to publish, one of the project maintainers will review the submission and confirm the document's XLS number, often making a follow-up commit to the PR which renames the file as appropriate.
> 
> Subsequent updates to the document should increment the `revision` number in the front-matter.

Author: ```suggestion
To publish a new Draft, submit a Pull Request to this repo with a new folder and a new Markdown file. The folder MUST follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d-{title}`, `0000` is the unique number referencing the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft, and `title` is a lower case title with spaces replaced by hyphens (`-`). The submission should have front-matter (similar to GitHub pages rendered from Markdown) specifying at least a `title` and `type`. The `type` MUST have the value `draft`.

Use the following template when creating the Markdown file: [xls-template.md](./xls-template.md)

Assuming there is consensus to publish, one of the project maintainers will review the submission and confirm the document's XLS number, often making a follow-up commit to the PR which renames the file as appropriate.
```

The number is important, as it will be used to reference features and ideas throughout the community.

Discussions are suitable for early work-in-progress: ask, suggest, add, and make sweeping changes.

Next, the discussion should be converted to a **PULL REQUEST** which adds the standard, as a Markdown file, to the repo with one or more commits.

The content of the discussion should be edited into a summary, with a link to the PR.

The last comment on the discussion should also be a link to the PR.

Finally, the discussion should be closed from further comments, with further comments instead being posted on the PR for fine-tuning and alignment with implementation or adoption (as appropriate).

When opening a PR, there are two document types: *Drafts* and *Candidate Specifications*. The type and status of any particular document has no bearing on the priority of that document. Typically, the further along in the process, the more likely it is that any particular XLS will be implemented or adopted.

### Drafts

> A _Draft_ is a document that proposes some new feature, protocol or idea related to the XRP Ledger. The criteria for getting the document merged is minimal: project maintainers will review the document to ensure style conformance and applicability, but will otherwise not require editorial fixes before allowing it to be published.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
A _Draft_ is a document that proposes some new feature, protocol or idea related to the XRP Ledger. The criteria for getting the document merged is minimal: project maintainers will review the document to ensure style conformance and applicability, but will otherwise not require editorial fixes before allowing it to be published.

A document does not need to have an implementation in order to become a Draft. A Draft may or may not have implementation(s) available; no code is required prior to the Draft being published.
```

> A Draft is often stable enough for people to experiment with, but has not necessarily been endorsed by the entire community. When there are competing Drafts that address the same problem in different ways, all such Drafts can continue to be refined, promoted, and used independently, without any blocking. Implementors can create software to implement this type of standard into their codebase to explore how it works in a real world setting.

Author: ```suggestion
A Draft is often stable enough for people to experiment with, but has not necessarily been endorsed by the entire community. When there are competing Drafts that address the same problem in different ways, all such Drafts can continue to be refined, promoted, and used independently, without any blocking. Implementors can create software to implement this type of standard into their codebase to explore how it works in a real world setting.

A document does not need to have an implementation in order to become a Draft. A Draft may or may not have implementation(s) available, and no code is required.
```

Reviewer 5: LGTM

Use the following template when creating the Markdown file: [xls-template.md](./xls-template.md)

Assuming there is consensus to publish, one of the project maintainers will review the submission and confirm the document's XLS number, often making a follow-up commit to the PR which renames the file as appropriate.

### Candidate Specifications

A _Candidate Specification_ is a document that was previously a Draft that is considered stable enough by the community such that no further changes are required. Once an XLS becomes a Candidate Specification, no further substantive changes are allowed under the same XLS number.

#### Publishing a Candidate Specification

When a Draft is considered stable, there is a call for review from the community to publish the document as a Candidate Specification.

Assuming there is consensus to publish, a maintainer will remove the `d` from the document name, and update the `type` to `candidate-specification`.

> Once published as a Candidate Specification, no further substantive changes are allowed under the same XLS number.

Author: ```suggestion
Once published as a Candidate Specification, no further substantive changes are allowed under the same XLS number.

For Specifications that require changes or implementation in the XRP Ledger server software and protocol, the Candidate Specification cannot be published until the relevant change has been merged into [the software's `master` branch](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/tree/master).
```

Reviewer 5: LGTM

#### Errata

> The community may discover errors in a Candidate Specification. In these circumstances, it is possible to update the document to fix typos or clarify the original meaning of the document. In these circumstances, the `revision` number should be incremented.

Author: ```suggestion
The community may discover errors in a Candidate Specification. In these circumstances, it is possible to update the document to fix typos or clarify the original meaning of the document.
```

Reviewer 5: LGTM

### Gathering Feedback Before Submitting

Please gather community input before opening a PR. Collecting such feedback helps to refine your concept. This step is required.

Start a [Discussion](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions) under this repo.

The title should follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d {Title}`, where `0000` is a unique number for the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft (in progress), and `{Title}` is a descriptive title for the proposed document.

Use the next number that has not yet been used. If a conflict occurs, it will be fixed by a maintainer or editor. Maintainers or editors also reserve the right to remove or re-number proposals as necessary.

The number is important, as it will be used to reference features and ideas throughout the community.

Discussions are suitable for early work-in-progress: ask, suggest, add, and make sweeping changes.

When a discussion has produced a well-refined standard, authors should post a comment to the discussion noting that it will be closed in a few days. This allows time (for those engaged with the discussion) to submit any final commentary. 

> When the time has elapsed, the standard's author must summarize the discussion in a comment and may close the discussion to further comments. Then, the author should move from discussion to a PULL REQUEST.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When the fair notice time has elapsed, the author should move from discussion to Draft by opening a PULL REQUEST.
```

> In the pull request, the standard should be added as a Markdown file into the repository.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```
The contents of a draft is outlined in the Draft section.

> The content of the discussion should be edited into a summary, with a link to the PR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The standard's author must edit and replace the post with a summary and a link to the PR.
```

To publish a new Draft, submit a Pull Request to this repo with a new folder and a new Markdown file. The folder MUST follow the naming convention `XLS-0000d-{title}`, `0000` is the unique number referencing the XLS, `d` indicates that the document is a Draft, and `title` is a lower case title with spaces replaced by hyphens (`-`). The submission should have front-matter (similar to GitHub pages rendered from Markdown) specifying at least a `title` and `type`. The `type` MUST have the value `draft`.

Use the following template when creating the Markdown file: [xls-template.md](./xls-template.md)

Assuming there is consensus to publish, one of the project maintainers will review the submission and confirm the document's XLS number, often making a follow-up commit to the PR which renames the file as appropriate.

### Candidate Specifications

A _Candidate Specification_ is a document that was previously a Draft that is considered stable enough by the community such that no further changes are required. Once an XLS becomes a Candidate Specification, no further substantive changes are allowed under the same XLS number.

#### Publishing a Candidate Specification

> When a Draft is considered stable, there is a call for review from the community to publish the document as a Candidate Specification.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a Draft is considered stable, there is a call for review from the community to publish the document as a Candidate Specification by making a PR to remove the `d` from the document folder name and update the `type` to `candidate-specification`.
```
